This is Debbie Park interviewing Mr. D.A.
Anderson at Mr. Anderson's home for the history of
the City of College Station Project, September
22nd, 1983, Side 1. I'd like
to start with some background information. Where
were you born? Well, I was born in Pittston,
Pennsylvania, P-I-T-T-S-T-O-N. That's in the
northeastern part of the state, in the anthracite
region. It's a small town not far from the Pocono
Mountains. And I spent quite a bit of time in the
Poconos as a youth, you know, in the mountains. And
that is one reason, I think, why my vocation trees
today. Actually, I had two choices. One was
medicine and the other was forestry. And they both
had an equal tug in my heart, but apparently
forestry won out and that was why I majored in
forestry at Penn State University. Well, were
your parents from Pennsylvania also My mother was
born there, but my father came from Scarborough.
And as a youth, he came while I guess he was about 21,
22 years old. And came to the area, married my
mother. And then he, well, he started to work in the
coal fields.
He rose to the rank of a foreman. He was a good
worker. I, myself, also worked in the mines during
the summer. Matter of fact, I carry a piece of coal
right there. I've never wanted to take it out. That
fell out of the roof one day. Oh, my gosh. And you can
see it. Oh, you sure can. Oh, my gosh. But it reminds
you of your... Well, that's why I carry it. It's a
memento of when I worked in the forest. Well, you
mentioned a minute ago about your education. You
went to the university or something? No, not the
university. I went to Penn State University. Penn
State. Yeah. And majored in forestry? And majored
in forestry. And did you work on... Well,
actually, even though I went to Penn State, they
had an area... in southern Pennsylvania where
they screened out potential foresters. And the
first two years you went all year. Summer you had
your ordinary curriculum. You were staying in a
dormitory and you were subject to firefighting,
you were subject to anything that arose in terms of
the forest. They had a nursery there, and you had to
work in the nursery. In other words, they had two
years, or anyone that went into forestry spent two
years doing a lot of distasteful work. In other
words, unless you liked it, you wouldn't stay. And
they made it hard, both in coursework and
otherwise. For example, we had what we called, in
that day, Boy Scout merit patches. I mean, we were
inclined to call them that. But we had to know, I
think, 30 constellations in the sky. In other
words, as people in forestry, this was part of it.
We had to know every, we called them bugs, insects.
that were flying around the campus or you know to
identify all the insects that were common to the
forest area or the city common names and
scientific names this was on the side we had to know
every rock you know a fellow professor pull up a
rock or pick up a rock in the area and we had to know
the type of rock this was all a prelude to other
formal education too. We had to know, we had to have
leaf collections, we had to have grass
collections, we had to know the sounds of all the
birds. We had to know all the birds. In other words,
they were making environmentalists really out of
us. Is the education different today? Oh yes, by
far, right. And even when you When I took the civil
service to get into federal civil service, it
lasted three days. And I had to know how to put a
telephone together and take it apart. I had to know
telephone lines, transposition, because being
in the Forest Service, well, you had to do with
communications. So we didn't have radios in these
days. So you had to know the communication system.
And they just threw everything at you. And as I
said, I think there were 91 starting out in our
class, and only seven graduated. Oh my God. Yeah.
Well, would you say that you gained more
information than what they do today? Oh yeah, by
far. I doubt seriously any of them would know the
birds or could go outside and call any
constellation any season of the year. You know,
where is north? And things of this nature. And
engineering, why they just stacked it on and
stacked it on. I could lay out railroad curves in my
freshman year, almost in my sleep. We had to go out
and estimate the ties, the number of ties per mile.
You know, on the railroad track, everything, and
at the bridge, make bridge designs.
It's amazing, the training they put you through in
the early days. And even then, you know, I had to
have two years of Latin before I, in high school,
before they would accept me at the university.
Well, I'm in favor of that type of an education.
It's a very well-rounded type. Oh, yeah. How did
you get involved in the Texas Forest Service?
Well, I started out in Pennsylvania. Following
graduation, I worked with the then Division of
Plant Industry in the U.S. Department of
Agriculture. This was in the control of a disease
that affects white pine, a tree, white pine. And
the alternate host of this disease is what is
called ribes, R-I-B-E-S. It's a currant or a
gooseberry. Maybe you like them, I don't know. Do
you ever eat currants or gooseberries? Okay.
With this alternate host, I mean the disease
spreads from the currant or gooseberry to the
pine, where it produces whole postules on the tree
and eventually will kill the tree. And the only way
to allow the tree to grow is to get rid of that
alternate host, which is the ribes. So I was
detailed. to travel all over the state of
Pennsylvania making recommendations in CCC
camps for the control of the ribies. And I was doing
that when the opportunity came up to come to Texas
with the U.S. Forest Service. So I came with the
U.S. Forest Service. To me, I mean, just coming to
Texas You know, that was just, that was a thing. I
mean, that was great to me. And being, you know,
somewhat of a pioneer anyhow, I thought this was
great. So I came down to Texas, and when I came here,
I had passed a civil service exam, but they didn't
have any civil service openings. So I was working
in the CCC program and other programs of the Forest
Service without really a... civil service, you
know, I wasn't in a civil service job. All of them
were filled up. But then there was an opening
occurred up in Channing and Stratford in the soil
conservation service.
So my wife and I bundled up. It was in the middle of
the summer. And we went up there to Channing and
Stratford. I don't know whether you have ever been
up there in July. You could just see that, you know,
that heat emanate from that ground. There were no
trees. You know, it was just a desolate area. So I
turned around and came back to the piney woods of
East Texas. I was at that time in Lufkin. Well then
when I came back, there was an opening in the Texas
Forest Service. So I wanted something a little bit
more permanent than to be an employee out here. Had
I stayed, everything would have worked out all
right. But I was taking a chance because all the
appointed offices were filled up. So I went with
the Texas Forest Service, which is a part of the A&M
system. And having gone with them, well, I stayed
with them for that period. And were you stationed
in College Station? No, I started out really in
Lufkin. With the Texas Forest Service? With the
Texas Forest Service and I was there through 38 and
then came over here and have been here ever since.
And was there a time that you became involved with
the educational program of the Texas Forest
Service? Yeah, that's right. Well, that came
later. yeah well yeah there was established in
Texas
well we had a part in it I guess
a committee for conservation education it was
eventually sponsored by the Texas Education
Agency and I was named to this particular
committee by Edgar, who was then the head of the
education department in Austin. And I served on
that committee for years and years and years.
Actually, I was president of the appointed group
for two terms. And every summer, I went up to
various colleges and universities throughout
the state of Texas. I really miss it, you know,
today, working with in-service and pre-service
teachers in the area of conservation education
resource use. My particular field was plants,
grass, trees, you know, any green thing. And then
there was one that dealt with oil and gas. There was
one with soils and one with wildlife, for example.
And I would go into the classroom or auditorium. I
had an experience there, too.
And then work with the teachers. Now, it all
depended on the particular program at the
university. Sometimes I would go and lecture for
most of the day and then be available the following
day or maybe that afternoon for the development of
work units, teaching units that were used in the
classroom. Well, what
years were you talking about that you were doing
this?
Oh, they
were in the 60s and 70s, yeah. Oh,
yeah.
Yeah,
just like the Extension Service. Any extension
service throughout Texas? No, no, no. Extension
service is just like the Forest Service. In other
words, it is part of the system. Of the A&M system?
Of the A&M system. Is there an extension service
of, say... No, there's an extension service.
Agricultural Extension Service is a different
group, a different organization. Then there's
the Engineering Extension Service. And see, the
fireman's training course, fireman's training
comes under engineering extension. Then there's
engineering experiment station. But the Texas
Forest Service or the whole state of Texas is part
of the university. Of A&M? Yeah. I didn't realize
that. Yeah. Well, then, was 38 the year that you
came to college here? It was late 38, 39, yeah. So
you were here... The city started in 38. It was 39. I
came just after the whole thing, you know, got
started. Right, okay. So you were here quite a
number of years before you... Oh, yeah, yeah,
right. Well, why did you decide to go to the city
council the first time? Well, some issues came up.
A lot of the citizens,
some issues came up. They weren't maybe, you know,
worth shaking in the community. But they asked me
if I would go before the council on their behalf and
do thus and so, which I did. And
it became a habit. If anything else came up, well,
Andy, why don't you go? You're our, you know, our
representative. So finally came around to an
election, and they said, well, you'd be better on
the council. You know what I mean. Rather than
going before the council, you can represent us
better. So with that in mind, I did run with their
support for the council. Were these mainly
neighbors? Oh, yeah. All of College Hills and all
around, yeah. Well, when you got on the council
those first couple of years, did you have anything
that you
were really interested in working on or a project
that you were interested in starting? Well, the
main issue at that time among the people, I think,
in most of the subdivisions were the subdivision
regulations, the deed restrictions.
These developers had these deed restrictions,
and they had them registered in court. They were
all nice, and you ran them over, and they were just
great. I mean, the distance between buildings
will be 10 feet, and no one will do this or that or the
other thing. But then you found that they didn't
adhere to that themselves. You know what I mean.
When they put up a house, they didn't adhere to some
of this. And then the city, for a while, got to the
point, this is one reason why I got involved, was,
well, now, for example, the deed restrictions
said 10 feet between your property line and your
house. It had to be on both sides, which made for 20
feet, which I like, personally. But the city
regulation was 5 feet. That means that somebody
could live 10 feet away. You open your blind in the
morning, somebody, you know what I mean. So we had
some problems here. And the city was willing to go
ahead and allow somebody to build a house on the lot
and build it almost to the property line. So this
was really a problem that we had to fight in the
early days. Now, a lot of this, you know, stems from
who was on the council, you know, not necessarily
when it started because they were primarily
university people. But boy, yeah, I hate to
mention his name, but I could tell you a lot of
things. Well, I'm going to take that. All right.
Well, if you, whatever you want to say, you can hang
out later. Don't feel like it's something that
will be in a record.
That was really, I mean, in the early days, this was
a concern to people, you know. Well, the city did
have subdivision ordinances. Were they allowing
people to go past those? Well, no, they lived up to
the city ordinance, but not to the deans. It
wouldn't enforce the deans. Right. Well, they did
after a while. When I got on the council, then we
started to respect the deed restrictions.
Oh, no, he wanted to make all the money he could. I
mean, that was his primary. He didn't care if
people had to park in the park. Excuse me. So the
people who were interested in real estate, I
guess, were into selling, buying real estate.
Well, they were selling homes or building homes.
You know what I mean? They didn't particularly
care about regulations. And this is what prompted
me, really, to get into
city politics. And then I served for six years. And
I figured, well, now that's enough. I'll just get
out. So I made up my mind that I'd just drop out. And
then, well, why, Andy, why can't you serve two
years on planning and zoning? I mean, that isn't,
well, that was worse almost. So I served two years
on planning and zoning. In the meantime, the
people, particularly all the way back here,
insisted then that I run for mayor. And I mean, I had
up here on the hill. Well, they knew then if I got in,
you know, they'd have some, they could knock on my
door and have some control. So, yeah, so then I
served six years on the council, two years on
planning and zoning, and then five years as mayor.
Well, when you first got on the council, Mayor
Lankford had been the mayor for quite a few years. A
good many years, right. And he was also
continuing for some more time. And can you
describe the philosophy that he employed as
mayor, what he was interested in? Well, we were all
interested, I think. We were interested. a very
conservative, at that time, council. Federal aid
was brought in the land. And all of us, of course,
serving on that council, came up through the
Depression.
I did myself as a boy. You know what I mean. I was a
product of the Depression. I went to school at the
university through the Depression. I know what
the school of hard knocks is. I came up on the other
side of the track. What I mean by that, I never had
much as a child because of, you know what I mean, the
economic conditions existing. And I scratched
around for everything to go to the university. And
if I could, well, I knew others could do the same
thing. I did everything. You know what I mean? Shoe
laces, shoe polish, I did everything to get a
little bit. I ate a lot of bread for meals, too. I
mean, I didn't... You know, bread was maybe my
breakfast or dinner, see? You know what I mean? You
just don't have it. You have to get by, and you work
harder to get another nickel to do something else.
And I went through the hard way, and I think
everybody on that council... you know, had that
spirit of, you know, if you pull yourself up by your
heels, there were a lot of federal projects in the
area we didn't particularly want. And we thought,
well, we ought to earn them ourselves. Do it
ourselves. Let's not call on the federal
government to do it. Well, this was, I think this
was the theme during most of Lankford's tenure.
Then I think the thinking began, I myself changed.
You know what I mean? Well, now here is Brian
getting it. Here is everybody all over the state
getting it. We're sending our taxes, and we're not
getting anything in return. So I think after life,
then there was a change in the philosophy on the
council, whereby then we'll go out after some of
these things. and i know the sewage disposal plant
i know was one and of course the fellow that was
heading up hued at that time was an aggie that was an
easy one we we had some disappointments
personally i have
we were well i'll say it but i had arranged to have
the this creek down here, channelized from the
apartments clear through to McCarter Creek as a
federal project. Now this was done through a
number of good friends
in the Soil Conservation Service and otherwise,
clear through to the Washington office.
This was in the Washington office and had been
approved, you know, now my application had been
put on top of the pile through some friends and had
been approved and was ready to leave Washington
and come down whereby this whole area would have
been channelized. And Glenn Cook out at the VVDC
raised the question that it was not approved at the
local level and therefore had to be thrown out and
he ruined that whole project because of his
attitude towards that there was no way that you
could locally improve it at this point well yeah i
could have gone through but then i would have been
in the bottom of the pile see i ran through french to
get in the top of the pile in washington And Eddie
called me up and said, Andy, what's this all about?
Or, you know, to help me rather than just turn it
down. And so, did the city ever channelize it? No.
No, I didn't think so. No. You know, it's just plain
ditch now. We'd have had all them federal funds
just to... Well,
it would be a HUD project.
But it's just one of these things that you wish that
something else had transpired, because that
would have been, in terms of drainage, Even today,
in a way, it hasn't totally drained the way it
should be
drained. Well, it's a shame that the project would
have been so worthwhile, and it's inhibited
because it's here for one of the wrong reasons, I
guess. Right, right. That's not in the record
either, I don't think. Oh, is that right? I hadn't
read about that. What did you see as advantages or
disadvantages for the city of College Station
having a mayor, the same
mayor, for 24 years? You served many years. Well, I
didn't, Lankford was, yeah, I served many years
with Lankford.
You know, during his tenure, the city was in the
formative stages. developing. If you look back
and see some of the old ordinances that were drawn
up, they're quite interesting. They wouldn't
hold water legally today, you know, the way some of
them were drawn up. But it was a formative
government.
I think
it was university controlled. for the most part,
until the boyhood got in, the faction got in. It had
to be. It was just like the school, you know. The
school was on the campus at that time, and then it
moved over to the chicken coops, as we called it.
I don't know what else to say. I think that...
Well,
everybody, everyone was really, I think, very
well satisfied with the form of government, for
the most part. Ernest never, he went in each
election. Sure, he had some people against him,
which is natural. But he went in with a fair-sized
majority, and people were satisfied in that
period. see the number, you know, the population.
You know, when I came here, this was just nothing
but a cotton field, you know, for the most part.
This is one of the oldest houses in the area. In the
area? Yeah. And when did you build this? This was
built in late 37 and 38 by Ross Sherwood, who was
head of the poultry department. And I bought the
house from him. For $4,000. Oh, my God. And that was
a lot of money. $4,000. No, I've added a lot to it.
You know, I've added a room in the back here and
added still further on in the back so that when the
children can come, like, you know, they have their
own bath and accommodations. A lot more room. Oh,
yeah. Yeah. Well, when you were on the council, it
seems as though a lot of time was spent working out
street repair and street building. Do you
remember? Oh, yeah. There were those that wanted
to, some few, that wanted to, wanted the city to
issue, well, they wanted to get a big bond issued to
pave all the streets. And again, that
conservatism in us showed up. And we got our
pencils out, and we figured we could do a better job
on a pay-as-you-go basis. And you probably read
about that in whatever you read. And we went to the
people in total support of a pay-as-you-go
program. and they endorsed it by an overwhelming
majority. I don't think we needed to spend the
money,
you know what I mean, millions of dollars just to
repair all the streets. I think we did a very
creditable job the other way and saved the city
much money. As you look back, do you think the
decision was the best? Right, I do, right. Do you
think the city might have gotten into a debt that
is... Well, a debt there, yeah. And of course,
you've got to keep in mind the philosophy of the...
You know what I mean? We went through a depression.
I know what a dollar is. And today, well, I'm going
to save that dollar for the city. And then
throughout my regime, when I was mayor, I squeezed
everything that I could to get a maximum out of that
dollar. Because I prided myself on trying to get a
maximum return on every dollar we spent. And
unless I figured we were going to get a return, that
was something else.
Also, there was a period when the city was trying to
build an underpass at Crompton Market Road 60 in
Wilbur. And it began in the 50s. They started
talking about it, but it wasn't completed until
the early 60s. I was wondering if you had any
thoughts as to why it was so delayed and what
happened with those. You mean the overpass?
Overpass, right. Yeah. At the railroad track.
Yeah, because you don't mean the one at Boyette.
Yeah. At University Drive? Right. Yeah. Well,
that's the one where I used the
voting procedure to get him to vote in favor of
something. This had come up at several meetings.
You've read the minutes. It came up. several
meetings in an attempt to get Boyette and his
followers to endorse, you know, the underpass.
And he wouldn't do it because of the condemnation
procedures against his land. And he did not think
they were fair and all kinds of things. The minutes
are replete with this information. And the judge,
Judge Bill Davis at the time, He was chomping at the
bits, and the highway department had the money,
and they were ready to go, and everything was held
up because of the situation. And that is when we,
well, we arranged to at least try Robert's Rules of
Water. And we were fortunate in raising it two
degrees and then coming back twice, or coming back
quickly and uh in the process you know unless you
keep your mind about you you don't know what what's
going on so we got him to vote in favor so up until
this point the council had not approved no city
taking part in in the condemnation no no no he held
everything up And it was through this Robert
Shultz Award that we got him mixed up. Well, was he
afraid that he wouldn't get enough money from the
condemnation group? Oh, yeah. He wanted a lot
more. Oh, I see. He wanted a lot more, and they
wouldn't allow any more. See, they met, and the
condemnation group met, and made this award. And
that was really the tops. They
made him an offer and everything else, yeah. I
forget, you know, the details, but he was well
aware of what he was going to get, and it was beyond
what other people normally thought was
justified. But he, you know, he had that, well,
cold beer, Oh, yeah. It was taken down to put in. Oh,
he didn't want to see that taken down? Well, yeah.
He said that was worth a million dollars. You know,
all them kind of stories.
For example, we only paid $175,000 to Louis Mays
for the intersection down here at University and
Highway 6. you know, right down across Caddy
Corner from the golf station. And that was a more
valuable piece of land than, boy, yes, you know, a
little track up there. But I thought he was
offering more than enough for what he had there.
And then when you realize what he did get out of the
churches and the business people, you know, and
how he got to the students, I... I'm just full of
stories. Well, I had heard that there's a lot of
things that happened also, building very, very
small apartments, I think, for students that
didn't meet the restrictions or didn't meet the
conditions. No. Well, see, this is when I bucked
him on this. This is really what started this
matter in the soup. Oh, I see. In other words, he
wanted to build one apartment unit there using the
street as a parking area. You know, building the
apartment right out to the street. And I said, I
wouldn't go along with that. He ought to provide
for off-street parking.
And that's really started. Was that after, when
was that? When I was mayor. And was he on council?
Yeah. He was still on council? Yeah, that was the
prelude, you know, to a lot of this other... Okay.
How did the council, when you were on council, feel
about planning? I know that the graduate period
plan was put into effect, but how effective was
that?
Well,
this was an attempt on the part of the county
highway department and the two cities to evolve a
long-range program, a plan that we could follow.
Any plan, however, is subject to revision. This is
my comment with some certain people at the
university now. It's all right to say that now the
city's going to grow this way and therefore I
should be planned accordingly. But then suppose
the city starts to grow this way, what are you going
to do? After your plan is, you know. You can't get a
plan that is 100% perfect. We had this particular
plan and I thought it did us very well for at least
five years or more. And then there was a lot of
interest in gender within the two cities to make
their own comprehensive plans. So, actually,
Brad's area plan was not... Well, we used it as a
guide. I think I still have copies of it around
someplace. They haven't stopped the city, I
guess. Well, I haven't seen it in mine, but I have.
Well, I don't think I threw them out. I think I still
have, because I was vice president of the board
when the last of them met. And... But it was a
forerunner to what the cities eventually then,
you know, took over and decided to expand on their
own. Now there was, as you probably know, there was
some hard feelings between Bryan and College
Station over the years. And it is still evident
today. I still run into it. But I can cite well These
things didn't help the community grow together,
you know, county-wise in two cities.
Well,
the plan was good for what it was intended to be. And
it served as a guide to our city for two years. Oh, I
say over five years. And then we began to expand on
it on our own and develop our own long-range plan.
And the city of Bryan attempted to do the same
thing. One divorced pretty much from the other.
Now they may say that they tried to coordinate, and
they did to some extent, but
each of them I think went off on their own in many
areas. I remember For example, we had a fellow come
in here and set up a taxi, a stand, across from
Ramona. And the radio controls of his office, very
nice, one-man outfit. And he called me one day and
he was arrested in crime. I said, arrested for
what? He said, because I can't take passengers
into crime from the airport. And I said, you don't
say. So I called up Brian, and I just told him, the
mayor and Brian, that in fact, tomorrow morning, I
gave orders to our police to stop every Brian taxi
that came into College Station because of
violation of our ordinance.
And they said, Eddie, what are they violating? I
said, they're violating our ordinance. That's
all I'm going to say. And they think that tomorrow
morning they'll do it. Now, I'm doing this because
our man was thus and so and so. And boy, they got on
the phone and all of them down there. Well, but the
next day it was all settled. That was when you were
mayor? Yeah. Well, it was just one of the
incidents. One of many, yeah. So the Brazos area
plan was... a plan for the overall county? Is it
like a transportation? Right, the highway
department and all of them were involved. And
hopefully it was to help the cities. The two cities
and the county as a whole. Grow together. Grow
together and plan together. But in fact they
didn't. Well they didn't, not to the extent that
they should have. To my knowledge, I don't know
whether the Razzis Area Incorporation still
exists or not. They had a charter, and I know I was
vice president the last time we met, and the thing
just naturally dissipated. Do you
remember when it dissipated? I think it was, I
guess it was, they started talking about it in the
early 60s, and it lasted about five years. Oh yeah,
yeah. and uh let's see what's the butler r.b butler
the senior
was uh president
i think oh yeah we we were but uh And it eventually
evolved. I think the stimuli, too, came from the
university to do, you know, more planning. And the
Planning and Zoning Commission then took a more
active role than it had in the past. And that led, of
course, to all the things that in late years
developed, you know, in terms of planning.
The previous years, I guess it was more of a
competition with slow but steady growth. Yeah,
that's right. It didn't have the growth that, you
know, it was just, you get a slow growth. Then when
we began really to expand and grow more at a faster
pace, things changed. Yeah. To a great deal. You
know, that's what this meeting was about today, in
part.
What's going to happen to this industrial country
between you and I? Are you aware of it? The
industrial development out there? Well,
somebody's got wind, and it's going to be huge.
Thank you.
Oh, I'll have to be there. Well, I don't come for it.
Oh, no, no, sir. I won't. Oh, and I don't write for
the papers either. Well, there's no
confidentiality about us here. But I am privy to a
lot of stuff by a lot of people. The Telman thing. So
when Andy, you know, it's off the record. Right.
And because I respect him, I hear more. You know
what I mean? I can get out of the courthouse And I
start down with the girl down there, the secretary
down there, you know, the commissioner. Chat with
them all down there, you know, and they'd go in and
think of getting the commissioner to go and go see
the sheriff, who's a friend of mine, and then start
upstairs, you know, chat with the JPs and the
county judge, you know what I mean, and all the rest
of them. And then drop at a bank or two and end up at
Vermont Inn. Well, I'm pretty well filled up
with... you know what's going on i'm gonna stop the
tape on this side because i'm afraid you'll run out
okay